Index spi (#162)
pinot-contrib/pinot-docs: basics/indexing/dictionary-index.md

## Influence on other indexes

Dictionaries are not only an index but an actual encoding in Pinot.
That means that when they are enabled, some other indexes change their behavior or layout.
The relation between dictionary and other indexes is the following:

| Index                          | Conditional               | Description                                                         |
|--------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|
| [forward](forward-index.md)    |                           | Implementation depends on whether the dictionary is enabled or not. |
| [range](range-index.md)        |                           | Implementation depends on whether the dictionary is enabled or not. |
| [inverted](inverted-index.md)  |                           | Requires dictionary.                                                |
| [json](json-index.md)          | when `optimizeDictionary` | Disables dictionary.                                                |
| [text](text-search-support.md) | when `optimizeDictionary` | Disables dictionary.                                                |

> | FST                            |                           | Requires dictionary.                                                |

Author: BTW, there is no documentation page about them!

> # Dictionary Index

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Dictionary index
```

> When storing large amounts of data, most of the time the values are repeated several times.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When storing large amounts of data, typically values are repeated several times.
```

> In order to optimize the storage and query latencies in this case, Pinot can be configured to use a dictionary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To optimize the storage and query latencies for repetitive data, we recommend using a dictionary index.
```

## Influence on other indexes

> Dictionaries are not only an index but an actual encoding in Pinot.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Dictionaries are both an index and actual encoding in Pinot.
```

That means that when they are enabled, some other indexes change their behavior or layout.

> The relation between dictionary and other indexes is the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The relation between dictionary and other indexes is shown in the following table:
```

| Index                                       | Conditional               | Description                                                         |
|---------------------------------------------|---------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | [forward](forward-index.md)                 |                           | Implementation depends on whether the dictionary is enabled or not. |

Reviewer: what happens if the dictionary is enabled what happens if it's not enabled?

Author: It is described in the forward index document

| [range](range-index.md)                     |                           | Implementation depends on whether the dictionary is enabled or not. |

> | [inverted](inverted-index.md)               |                           | Requires dictionary.                                                |

Reviewer: Requires the dictionary index to be enabled?

Author: Yes

> | [inverted](inverted-index.md)               |                           | Requires dictionary.                                                |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [inverted](inverted-index.md)               |                           | Requires the dictionary index to be enabled.                                                |
```

| [json](json-index.md)                       | when `optimizeDictionary` | Disables dictionary.                                                |
| [text](text-search-support.md)              | when `optimizeDictionary` | Disables dictionary.                                                |
| FST                                         |                           | Requires dictionary.                                                |
| [H3 (or geospatial)](geospatial-support.md) |                           | Requires no dictionary.                                             |

## Configuration

> ### How to enable or disable dictionaries

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Enable or disable dictionaries
```

Unlike most indexes, dictionary indexes are enabled by default, assuming that the number of unique values will

> be orders of magnitude smaller than the number of rows.

Reviewer: what happens if the number of unique values will not be orders of magnitude smaller than the number of rows?

Author: Then we recommend to disable the dictionary, as explained below. Being more descriptive, if the number of unique value is in the order of the number of rows (which means that mostly each row will have a unique value) then the dictionary will just be a waste of space and time. Do you think we should add that more descriptive text?

> If this is not the case, it is recommended to disable the dictionary for the column.

Reviewer: if what isn't the case?

Author: It refers to the paragraph above: whether or not the number of unique values is orders of magnitude smaller than the number of rows

> If this is not the case, it is recommended to disable the dictionary for the column.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If this is not the case, disable the dictionary for the column by specifying the `disabled` property in `indexes.dictionary`:
```

> In order to that, use the `disabled` property in `indexes.dictionary`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

{% code title="Configured in tableConfig fieldConfigList" %}
```javascript
{
  "fieldConfigList": [
    {
      "name": "theTableName",
      "indexes": {

>         "dictioanry": {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        "dictionary": {
```

Author: nice catch!

          "disabled": true
        }
      }
    },
    ...
  ],
...
}
```
{% endcode %}

> Alternatively, the `encodingType` property can be changed. For example:

Reviewer: does this also disable the dictionary?

Author: Yes. It is explained below when we recommend to be consistent

```javascript
{
  "fieldConfigList": [
    {
      "name": "theTableName",
      "encodingType": "RAW"
    },
    ...
  ],
...
}
```
{% endcode %}

Use the option you prefer, but try to be consistent, as Pinot will reject table configurations where the same column and
index is defined in different places.

> The decision of actually create the dictionary or not can be delegated to some included Pinot heuristics.

Reviewer: The decision to create?
.....what does some included refer to specifically?

> This feature can be enabled in `indexingConfig` object inside table config.

Reviewer: Does "this feature" refer to the dictionary index?

Author: it does specifically refer to the heuristic that decides whether or not create the dictionary.

To be clear:
1. Dictionaries are a special kind of index whether or not are enabled by default is decided by some heuristic
2. That means that if the customer explicitly enables or disable the index, the heuristic does not apply.
3. The default heuristic can be changed.
4. The default heuristic is to always create the index.
5. The default heuristic can be changed with the configuration explained in the below.

I think the thing we want to explain is quite complex (and maybe the reason why it wasn't documented before).

I'm open to new alternatives that completely rewrite this part of the document to make it easier to understand

The parameters that control the heuristic are:

| Parameter                      | Default | Description                                                          |
|--------------------------------|---------|----------------------------------------------------------------------|
| optimizeDictionary             | false   | Enables the heuristic for all columns and activate some extra rules. |
| optimizeDictionaryForMetrics   | false   | Enables the heuristic for metric columns.                            |
| noDictionarySizeRatioThreshold | 0.85    | The ratio used in the heuristics.                                    |

> It is important to note that these parameters are configured for all columns on the table.

Reviewer: why is this important?

Author: Because all other configuration named before were applied individually to each column. This one is the first that is applied to all the table. I think it worth to mention that, as an user reading this just try to add this to the column specific configuration

When this optimization is enabled, columns explicitly marked as dictionary will actually be encoded as raw 

> if:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
if all of the following criteria are true:
```

> - They are not multi-valued.

Reviewer: Columns are not multi-valued?

Author: Yes, I think that can be derived from the context, but we can replace `they` with `column` here if you think that easier to understand.

> - And their column type is fixed size (like int, long, double, timestamp, etc).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- And their column type is a fixed size (like int, long, double, timestamp, etc).
```

Author: I'm not sure whether we should add the `a` here. `fixed size` is a property of the type. Alternative we could say `their column type size is fixed`

> - And their ratio between the forward index size encoded as raw and the forward index size encoded as dictionary is lower than `noDictionarySizeRatioThreshold`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The ratio between the forward index size encoded as raw and the forward index size encoded as dictionary is lower than `noDictionarySizeRatioThreshold`.
```

If `optimizeDictionary` is false and `optimizeDictionaryForMetrics` is true, only columns declared as metric will be affected.
If `optimizeDictionary` is true, all columns will be affected.

> Also in this case columns indexed as [text](./text-search-support.md) or [JSON](./json-index.md) will automatically be indexed as raw.

Reviewer: in the case optimizeDictionary is true or false?

Author: In the case `optimizeDictionary` is true. I think the text is clear, but I'm open to a rewrite alternative if you find it confusing.

Note that `optimizeDictionary` has priority over `optimizeDictionaryForMetrics` and the special rule applied to text 
and JSON indexes only applies when `optimizeDictionary` is true.

### Parameters

There are some options you can configure:

| Parameter              | Default | Description                                    |
|------------------------|---------|------------------------------------------------|
| onHeap                 | false   | If the index must be load on heap or off heap. |
| useVarLengthDictionary | false   | How to store variable length values.           |

Dictionaries are always off heap, but in cases where the cardinality is small and the footprint on heap is acceptably 

> small, they can be copied in memory by changing `onHeap` parameter to true.

Reviewer: does "they" refer to the dictionary index?

Author: Yes. What else could be?

> When they are on heap, dictionaries can be faster and some extra optimizations can be done.

Reviewer: helpful to clarify "they"

Author: I don't get it. We are talking about dictionaries here. Is the pronoun not correctly used here?

> Parameter `useVarLengthDictionary` only affects columns whose values require variable number of bytes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Parameter `useVarLengthDictionary` only affects columns whose values require a variable number of bytes.
```

That means that:
* The column type requires variable number of bytes (like string, bytes or big decimal).
* Not all values on the segment require the same number of bytes.

>   For example, if the segment only contains values "a", "b" and "c", Pinot will detect that there all values

Reviewer: Pinot determines that all values can be represented....?

  can be represented with the same number of bytes.

By default, this parameter is `false`, which means that Pinot will calculate the larger value contained in the segment.

> That is the length that will be used for each value.

Reviewer: the `useVarLengthDictionary` parameter?

Author: `That [calculated value] is the length that will be used for each value`.

Do you think something like would be better?

> By default, this parameter is `false`, which means that Pinot will calculate the longer value contained in the segment and use that maximum number of bytes to store each value in the segment.

This guarantees that all values can be stored and produce faster access and a more compressed layout when the length of

> values are quite similar.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
values are similar.
```

> This default is not great when there are a few very large values and a lot of very small ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your dataset has few very large values and a lot of very small ones, we recommend
```

> In that case it is recommended to indicate Pinot to use a variable length encoding by setting `useVarLengthDictionary` to `true`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specifying that Pinot use a variable length encoding by setting `useVarLengthDictionary` to `true`.
```

When the variable encoding is used, Pinot needs to store the entry length, so the cost of storing an entry is

> their actual size plus 4 bytes offset.

Reviewer: the actual size of the entry?

Author: It should be `its` given it we are talking about a singular entity (an entry), right?

### When dictionaries are created

> Although dictionaries are enabled by default, they are usually not created at 

Reviewer: is something missing?
